I have had the possibility in mind for
one full year now to make a video
talking about how I first met and fell
in love with my ex-wife I had it in mind
because I was speaking to my mother
somewhat acrimonious conversation and I
said to my mother you know Gayle you
never asked me this neither my mother
and or my father who's now deceased
neither you ever asked me now do you
show any interest in how did I meet this
woman
why did I love with her and for me that
reflects the kind of strange pattern in
my relationship with my parents and that
they just showed really no sincere
interest in hearing my side of the story
sort of in different fraught situations
of conflict whether that was a
relatively trivial conflict between
myself and my sister or I don't know
well the question like this something
that really matters a complex
high-stakes series of negotiations are
running my divorce so this is probably
going to be the first of a series of
videos probably spaced out over a couple
of months on a No where I look back on
and reflect on my relationship with my
ex-wife and our decision to get divorced
and the situation I'm in now legally
personally and otherwise which is a lot
more interesting than anyone could
reasonably imagine some of you guys have
been long-term fans of my channel so my
old videos that probably just took way
too many hours to explain this stuff I
think all those videos were minutes long
and this video is relatively positive
relatively upbeat and I think will be
interested in my own daughter in the
near future my daughter is now five
years old but when she's getting closer
to 15 years old I can definitely imagine
her one to see a video like this it's
relatively positive relatively up
because it's basically about the
positive qualities my ex-wife had how we
met and fell in love we didn't get
married by accident and I tell you there
are things I really valued about her so
it's not just telling that story but
inevitably it's also telling you a bit
about the kind of woman she was her
personal qualities or characteristics or
how she cultivated or developed them
I definitely think would be meaningless
to tell the story with the kind of blank
placeholder but the crucial character of
my my wife might be so in terms of her
character in her character formation I
really think the crucial thing to
understand is how she emerged from and
reacted against her father's personal
philosophy or ideology now this is true
of many of us I could describe my own
character as something that emerged in
contrast to things my parents believed
in things my parents taught me most
obviously communism you know up to a
certain age I'm listening and learning
to what they say about politics I'm
listening learning to what they say
about economics and history and then
after a certain age I'm becoming more
and more skeptical and doing my own
reading I'm challenging those ideas and
discovering the extent to which things
they've taught me are really wrong so
not everybody goes to this path but you
know if you were raised a Christian or
Mormon or something and became an
atheist similar pattern so on and so
forth now to my knowledge I may be wrong
to my knowledge my ex-wife's father has
actually been diagnosed as having
narcissistic personality disorder a
narcissistic personality disorder one of
the first things they tell you in
textbooks and academic articles is to
disregard the colloquial meaning of the
word narcissism because they say well
you know narcissistic personality
disorder it ended up with this peculiar
name for different cultural and
historical reasons by the way narcissism
goes back to the the myth of narcissus
and one particular poem actually an
ancient Greek about narcissus so I mean
you know it's ended up with this term
appended to it but it really has nothing
to do with narcissism and in the you
know popular imagination how we
understand the meaning of that word
um however my ex-wife was raised being
told again and again as a child that she
was special that society's rules did not
apply to her one of the things her
father said again and again to her and
her brother often
both of them collectively was we're not
like other people
we're not like normal people that we
that somehow the three of them were
special and were superior to Society
standards and normal rules and this was
in some ways part and parcel of her
father's rejection of academia and
higher education and by the way when I
first met him and he first start to get
to know me he was one of the few people
who saw it really positively that I
didn't have a PhD that I had gone out
and become a scholar of Buddhism blazing
my own trail so to speak my research
that I've done all this research and
humanitarian work making my own rules
and not being a part of the academic
system cuz I was just some people the
first thing they say if they read my
resume was why aren't you in a ph.d
program good question squirrely there's
some ways in which I relate positively
myself this guy's philosophy and I can
also see that you know he came out of
that kind of golden generation in
computer programming when you could have
a great career in computer programming
even if even if you dropped at a high
school when formal credentials didn't
matter that much in computer science
computer programming especially in
software he learned if you taught
yourself how to do computer programming
you'd have a career to what extent
that's still true today is debatable
it's not what we're talking about in
this video but you could see the way
that sense of specialness and I don't
know anti-establishment independence fit
very well with being a successful
computer programmer in the era when the
internet was first emerging in the era
when systems like UNIX and Linux and
those kinds of independent anti
anti-establishment vaguely anarchic
projects were taking off he was really
part of that that golden generation
that's now now come and gone so he
raised his kids with these expectations
of themselves in this perception of
society and he imparted to them his
cynicism about the prospect of getting
things like a like a PhD because what
was interesting about this is when I met
my ex-wife when we met for the first
time she was precisely enrolled in a
ph.d and it was specifically a PhD in
anthropology before she entered into
that ph.d program I think exactly what
she was struggling
was the contrast between this sense of
specialness exceptionalism and the
mundane reality of being a waitress I
think already at that time she was a
jazz singer as a hobby she had some
other interests in the arts but she did
waitressing
she worked in a bookmark Factory she
went through various long-term
relationships with boyfriends who became
ex boyfriends she had a very normal life
in many ways so this idea that she's not
normal that she's extraordinary and that
she didn't need higher education to
distinguish herself and so on obviously
um you know there was an incongruous
contrast between the etiology of her
childhood and what had to be inevitably
the etiology of her for adult years and
she had a series of conversations with
someone at work as I recall this is when
she was working as a waitress and I
forget if it was just one of her regular
customers her co-worker well the diet
had a series of conversations with her
and he said to her one day based on her
interests and her character based on
I've been God to getting to know her a
little bit he said well look you know I
know you're interested in going back to
university and getting a PhD in
something anthropology anthropology
would really suit you and she looked
into it a little bit I assume with a few
Google searches what have you and that
was the path she decided to take now I
mean we live in a very peculiar world
this way the decisions of just a few
people created that opportunity for her
and I later met some of the professors
who made those decisions and in case you
think there's any higher power or grand
scheme or divine plan or what have you
know I mean it's it's really random it's
really arbitrary it's not that it's
random it's that it's arbitrary comes
down to a face-to-face meeting with one
professor on one day and whether or not
he's in a good mood of whether or not
you tell
what he wants to hear about your
research interests and so forth um it's
a little bit scary just how arbitrary
that that can be and she was ultimately
given the extraordinary opportunity to
get a PhD at Cambridge University now
when I met her she was already at the
stage of being totally disillusioned
with that PhD having lost all faith in
the institution all sense of direction
and motivation in terms of the content
of the research she was doing and she
had more or less made up her mind to
drop out of the PhD or to delay it for
many years and again this probably
partly reflected you know her own
upbringing that she was armed with
cynicism going into this but I think
that really is a mass phenomenon
definitely in in British academia that
people make serious sacrifices and
devote themselves to higher learning and
then when they arrive in the institution
[Music]
it is simply not what they were
expecting
there it falls short of their hopes and
that may be that they're disappointed in
the content of what they're learning it
may be that at this point with the
particular people who are their
professors in positions of authority and
there's no negotiating with the
authority figures in these cases either
you have to conform or we have to get
out that's definitely how it is in elite
British you have a British education
whether or not it's a little bit
different where you are if you're
watching this in Greece or similar South
East Asia that's that's not more time to
talk about Cambridge and Oxford and
they're there in some ways a
particularly extreme form of Western
English language academia that does
indeed rely on a lot of flattery and
bootlicking and what-have-you it's an
ultra conformist atmosphere at the same
time that it ostensibly praises and
valorizes kind of Socratic values of
free discourse and questioning my
ex-wife and I both receive an email that
was about one sentence long and it was
an email from a gray-haired why
man living in Kunming China he did have
a PhD he had a PhD from Hong Kong
University and he had inherited enough
money to survive at least in China
indefinitely he did not live in wealth
at all
he had a small apartment in Kunming and
I'll always remember his apartment in a
parallel life this could have been me he
had almost no furniture in the whole
apartment so it is an apartment large
enough to raise a family and in China
and several of the rooms of the
apartment yet no bookshelves
he just had books lined up along the
wall the edges of the walls all the way
around the apartment so he could walk
through the apartment and find the book
he needed for his research so he was
like he was an eccentric intellectual
doing his own research and working on
some combination of books he was also to
some extent a true believing communist
or Marxist which made him a bit of a
natural enemy of mine
this guy had met us both and he sent a
one-line email to both of us and said
hey you two should get to know each
other you shouldn't beat up some time
and later on we actually met him face to
face and we think that we said of an
email because later on when it was clear
we were gonna get married and so he said
well it's all it's all thanks to you
know that we we met up and started
talking so that was the start of an
email correspondence with her at a time
when my life was going through dramatic
changes and I think what's really worth
emphasizing is that in the months that
followed immediately I became the
motivation and direction for her
research for her putting her effort back
into that PhD seriously and I mean you
know obviously if she were telling her
side of the story she might remember
that differently but most people have
known not just my girlfriend's like not
just intimate friendships and lovers
it's not as if they've grown up around a
whole lot of examples of what it means
to be an intellectual you know and the
examples you have in front of you might
be really peculiar people on television
it might be Connie
West you know seriously what what does
it mean to be an intellectual they're
probably a few figures you've seen
interviewed on the news like you know
for me playwrights and artists
I mean you okay Pablo Picasso it's a
horrible example what does it mean to be
an intellectual if you think it's living
like Pablo Picasso that's a terrible
example
so in meeting me um I became an example
and a symbol of a lot of things that she
had been looking for in her own life and
she was hoping to find in that ph.d
program she didn't find I also became
the answer to a lot of questions that
she had about communist I'm sure because
she was doing research on Communist
China but also the Buddhism about of a
lot of meaningful questions that were
going on in her mind and that she wasn't
getting answers to within the hothouse
of of Western academia so from the first
time we met there was a lot to talk
about it was a romantic and dramatic
meeting we both she actually ended up
taking an even longer bus journey than I
did
I think I took the bus from Bangkok
Thailand all the way to the end chan
laos and then from Laos all the way up
to China up to up to you nan China we
met in the small town of Jing Hong and
her trip even though it was all within
China she took a trip from extremely
remote mountainous area of me giong to
come in and then took a bus from Kunming
down to Jing Hong and why did we both
make this extraordinary sacrifice of
time and in those days riding long
distance buses in China and said that it
was not comfortable it was really heroin
to go this distance she thought in terms
of the schedule of her PhD that she only
had a brief window of time would it be
possible for her to meet me face to face
then she'd have to fly back to England
and fly back again a significant time
later so we thought we had only a brief
would have opportunity we ended up
having
couple of months together so you know we
met we fell in love we had tremendous
physical chemistry you know I'm sorry
but to be blunt I think this is part of
the story that has to be included I was
the best sex she'd ever had in her life
by far it really changed the way she
thought about herself not just as
intellectual but also you know in terms
of her sexuality in a row you know
relations with men it gave her a new
perspective on all that stuff and you
know from the very first week we spent
together there were a lot of red flags
about what was wrong with her and how
this relationship would inevitably end
there were a lot of red flags in her
behavior
there were things she said and did that
were frankly crazy and they didn't just
go on for five minutes or 15 minutes in
many cases they went on for hours and
hours and why did I overlook those red
flags
um someone from the outside might say
well I Zoll you thought this woman was
kind of good on paper that's a that's an
old-fashioned and evening you know she's
in a ph.d program she has a respectable
education therefore she can't be crazy
or she can't be dishonest which is the
real one of the real problems here or
she can't be a malignant narcissist so
these feather earth he's other issues
that were to come up in the the course
the relationship and the divorce you
know you must have just been kind of
seduced by the idea that this woman was
exactly what you were not this woman was
formally enrolled in a PhD and getting
the credentials that you yourself lack
and that's still now in 2018 I lack that
she was a sort of she was a formal
intellectual and scholar whereas I was
an informal autodidact self defined self
masculine that was not what it was at
all there were really serious red flags
from the first week we spent together
but I chose to overlook those red flags
because I could recognize that from the
first day
we spent together this woman was falling
in love with me she gave us a while she
completely fall in love with me that she
was in a situation where she was in a
state of extreme emotional distress or
whatever did the pressure she fell
Thunder I could see that I mean for
example the first time we talked about
Buddhism
she was trying so hard to say what she
thought I wanted to hear about Buddhism
and you know again this is something
that's happened repeatedly in my life
there's a moment I'm certain she
remembers it also where we were both
sitting on on the couch we've been
together for a few days but it was
definitely still the first week the
relationship and she said to me you know
when she was really being sincere
looking in my eyes she said to me you
know I feel like we should just kind of
get rid of the you know we should get
rid of the pretense of having a you know
a period of of dating or something you
know I want to marry you I think you
know thank you and make sure you should
get married and I laughed in a kind of
cool and detached way I said you know
there are some questions that I think
you should leave until the second week
of the relationship that was our first
week together and she was completely
head over heels in love with me and you
can tell even from that anecdote it's
not that there was a big gap in age
between us you know we have three years
difference in age it wasn't there was a
big gap in experience between us if
anything I think she was more
experienced in love and relationships
than I was but I was more detached and
clear thinking about the relationship
and she was you know completely utterly
in love with me so the positive side of
how I met and fell in love with my
ex-wife is precisely that from the first
day from the first week there was the
potential there for a partnership to get
so much done in terms of research
education learning having a life where
each part of the relationship each
partner is stimulating the other to
accomplish more
to get more done in their lives the
level of debate and mutual scrutiny we
could have where I could read her world
and criticize it and tell her
productively how to improve it and vice
versa you know the potential for us to
be in that sense a power couple not
obviously not in terms of making making
money I think both of us really felt it
and each of us provided for the other
what we had been looking for in our
friends and colleagues for years but
that our friends and colleagues in
reality had utterly failed to provide us
with so with the with the significant
caveat that from the very first week
there were red flags there were really
serious red flags that I was putting my
trust in someone who was not trustworthy
someone I could never trust and should
never trust and that I chose to overlook
those red flags with that footnote
having been stated the relationship
started off on this incredibly positive
and optimistic note and with all of the
bad and terrible things you're gonna
learn the other videos in this series I
can say that for both of us it was
tremendously intellectually stimulating
a productive period of our lives a lot
of misery a lot of heartbreak a lot of
other negative things to say but for me
I made the transition from being a
scholar of Buddhism to you know switched
from learning lotion to learning Chinese
to learning cambodian to learn increase
flirting a jib way
First Nations university and all these
other transitions all these other
dramatic reversals of fortune for me I
wrote and presented the lectures that I
did at Cambridge and Oxford in England I
did all these all this original research
it was also a period of time for me
bringing together and writing and
publishing the research had done in the
years leading up to it is it
tremendously and for her it was the
period of time when she brought together
and wrote up the research that was in
her PhD thesis that in brief is the
story of how I am i exploit met and fell
in love